every weekend for as long as I can
remember my father would get up on a
Saturday put on a worn sweatshirt and
it's scrape away at the squeaky old
wheel of a house that we lived in I
wouldn't even call it restoration it was
a ritual catharsis he would spend all
year scraping paint with this old heat
gun and a spackle knife and then a
repaint where he scraped only to begin
again following year
scraping and REE scraping painting and
repainting the work of an old house is
never meant to be done the day my father
turned 52 I got a phone call my mother
was on the line to tell me that doctors
had found a lump in his stomach terminal
cancer she told me and he had been given
only three weeks to live
I immediately moved home to pick it see
in New York to sit with my father on
Death Watch not knowing what the next
days would bring us keep myself
distracted I rolled up my sleeves and I
went about finishing what he could now
no longer complete the restoration of
our old home when that looming
three-week deadline came and then went
he was still alive and at three months
he joined me we gutted and repainted the
interior at six months the old windows
were refinished and at eighteen months
the rotted porch was finally replaced
and there was my father standing with me
outside admiring a day's work hair on
his head fully in remission when he
turned to me and he said you know
Michael this house
saved my life so following year I
decided to go to architecture school
but there I learned something different
about buildings recognition seem to come
to those who prioritized novel and
sculptural forms like ribbons or pickles
and I think this is supposed to be a
snail something about this bothered me
why was it that the the best architects
the greatest architecture all beautiful
and visionary and innovative is also so
rare and seems to serve so very few and
more to the point with all of this
creative talent what more could we do
just as I was about to start my final
exams I decided to take a break from an
all-nighter and go to a lecture by dr.
Paul Farmer a leading health activist
for the global poor and I was surprised
to hear a doctor talking about
architecture buildings are making people
sick er he said and for the poorest in
the world
this is causing epidemic level problems
in this hospital in South Africa
patients that came in with say a broken
leg to wait in this unventilated hallway
walked out with a multidrug-resistant
strand of tuberculosis simple designs
for infection control had not been
thought about and people had died
because of it where are the architects
Paul said if hospitals are making people
sick er where are the architects and
designers to help us build and design
hospitals that allow us to heal that
following summer I was in the back of a
Land Rover with a few classmates bumping
over the mountainous hillsides of Rwanda
for the next year I'd be living in Bou
taro in this old guesthouse which was a
jail after the genocide and I was there
to design and build a new type of
hospital with dr. farmer and his team if
hallways are making patients sicker what
if we could design a hospital that flips
the hallways on the outside and makes
people walk in the exterior if
mechanical systems
what if we could design a hospital that
could breathe through natural
ventilation and meanwhile reduce its
environmental footprint and what about
the patient's experience evidence shows
that a simple view of nature can
radically improve health outcomes so why
couldn't we design a hospital where
every patient had a window with a view
simple site-specific designs can make a
hospital that heals designing it is one
thing getting a built we learned is
quite another we worked with Bruce news
a a brilliant engineer and he thought
about construction differently than I
had been taught in school when we had to
excavate this enormous hilltop and a
bulldozer was expensive and hard to get
to site Bruce suggested doing it by hand
using a method in Rwanda called Ubu daje
which means community works for the
community hundreds of people came with
shovels and hoes and we excavated that
hill in half the time and half the cost
of that bulldozer instead of importing
furniture Bruce started a guild and he
brought in master carpenters to train
others and how to make furniture by hand
and on this jobsite 15 years after the
Rwandan genocide
Bruce insisted that we bring on labor
from all backgrounds and that half of
them be women Bruce was using the
process of building to heal not just for
those who were sick but for the entire
community as a whole we call this the
locally fabricated way of building or
low fab and it has four pillars hire
locally source regionally trained where
you can and most importantly think about
every design decision as an opportunity
to invest in the dignity of the places
and where you serve think of it like the
local food movement but for architecture
and we're convinced that this way a
building can be replicated across the
world and change the way that we talk
about and evaluate architecture using a
low fab way of building even aesthetic
decisions can be
designed to impact people's lives in
potaro we chose to use a local volcanic
stone found in abundance within the area
but often considered a nuisance by
farmers and piled on the side of the
road we worked with these masons to cut
these stones and form them into the
walls of the hospital and when they
began on this corner and wrapped around
the entire hospital they were so good at
putting these stones together they asked
us if they could take down the original
wall and rebuild it and you see what is
possible it's beautiful and the beauty
to me comes from the fact that I know
that hands cut these stones and they
form them into this thick wall made only
in this place with rocks from this soil
when you go outside today and you look
at your built world ask not only what is
the environmental footprint an important
question but what if we also asked what
is the human handprint of those who made
it we started a new practice based
around these questions and we tested it
around the world like in Haiti where we
asked if a new hospital could help end
the epidemic of cholera in this 100-bed
hospital we designed a simple strategy
to clean contaminated medical waste
before it enters the water table and our
partners at lasondra Jess Keough are
already saving lives because of it or
Malawi we asked if a birthing center
could radically reduce maternal and
infant mortality Malawi has one of the
highest rates of maternal and infant
death in the world using a simple
strategy to be replicated nationally we
designed a birthing center that would
attract women and their attendants to
come to the hospital earlier and
therefore have safer births or in the
Congo where we asked if an educational
center could also be used to protect
endangered wildlife poaching for ivory
and bush meat is leading to global
epidemic disease transfer and war in one
of the hardest to reach places in the
world we use the mud and the dirt and
the wood around us to construct a center
that would show us ways to
detect and conserve our rich
biodiversity even here in the US we were
asked to rethink the largest university
for the deaf and hard of hearing in the
world the deaf community through sign
language shows us the power of visual
communication we designed a campus that
would awaken the ways in which we as
humans all communicate both verbally and
non-verbally and even in the Kip see my
hometown we thought about old industrial
infrastructure we wondered could we use
arts and culture and design to
revitalize this city and other Rust Belt
cities across our nation and turn them
into centers for innovation and growth
in each of these projects we asked a
simple question what more can
architecture do and by asking that
question we're forced to consider how we
could create jobs how we could source
regionally and how we could invest in
the dignity of the communities in which
we serve I have learned that
architecture can be a transformative
engine for change about a year ago I
read an article about a tireless and
intrepid civil rights leader named Bryan
Stevenson
and Brian had a bold architectural
vision he and his team had been
documenting the over 4,000 lynchings of
African Americans that have happened in
the American South and they had a plan
to mark every county where these
lynchings occurred and build a national
memorial to the victims of lynching in
Montgomery Alabama countries like
Germany and South Africa and of course
Rwanda have found it necessary to build
memorials to reflect on the atrocities
of their past in order to heal their
national psyche we have yet to do this
in the United States
so I sent a cold email to info at equal
justice initiative org dear Brian it
said I think your building project is
maybe the most important project we
could do in America and change the way
we think about racial injustice by any
chance do you know who will design it
surprisingly shockingly Brian got right
back to me and invited me down to meet
with his team and talk to them needless
to say I cancelled all my meetings and I
jumped on a plane to Montgomery Alabama
and when I got there Brian his team
picked me up and we walked around the
city and they took the time to point out
the many markers that have been placed
all over the city to the history of the
Confederacy and the very few that mark
the history of slavery and then he
walked me to a hill and it overlooked
the whole city and he pointed out the
river and the train tracks were the
largest domestic slave trading port in
America had once prospered and then to
the Capitol Rotunda where George Wallace
had stood on its steps and proclaimed
segregation forever and then to the very
hill below us and he said here we will
build a new memorial that will change
the identity of the city and of this
nation our two teams have worked
together over the last year to design
this memorial
the memorial will take us on a journey
through a classical almost familiar
building type like the Parthenon or the
colonnade at the Vatican but as we enter
the ground drops below us and our
perception shifts where we realize that
these columns evoke the lynchings which
happened in the public square
and as we continue we begin to
understand the vast number of those who
have yet to be put to rest and their
names will be engraved on the markers
that hang above us and just outside will
be a field of identical columns but
these are temporary columns waiting in
purgatory to be placed in the very
counties where these lynchings occurred
over the next few years this site will
bear witness as each of these markers is
claimed and visibly placed in those
counties our nation will begin to heal
from over a century of silence and when
we think about how it should be built we
were reminded of Ubud a hey the building
process we learned about in Rwanda we
wondered if we could fill those very
columns with the soil from the sites
where these killings occurred Brian and
his team have begun collecting that soil
and preserving it in individual jars
with family members community leaders
and descendants the act of collecting
soil itself has led to a type of
spiritual healing it's an act of
restorative justice as one eji team
member noted the collection of soil from
where will McBride was lynched if will
McBride left one drop of sweat one drop
of blood one hair follicle I pray that I
dug it up and that his whole body would
be at peace
we plan to break ground on this memorial
later this year and it will be a place
to finally speak of the unspeakable acts
that have scarred this nation
my father told me that day that this
house our house had saved his life what
I didn't know was that he's referring to
a much deeper relationship between
architecture and ourselves buildings are
not simply expressive sculptures they
make visible our personal and our
collective aspirations as a society
great architecture can give us hope
great architecture can heal thank you
very much